Feat/response header (#1880)
nginxinc/nginx-gateway-fabric: site/content/how-to/traffic-management/response-headers.md

---
title: "HTTP Response Headers"

> description: "Learn how to modify response headers for your HTTP Route using NGINX Gateway Fabric."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Learn how to modify the response headers of your application using NGINX Gateway Fabric."
```

weight: 700
toc: true
docs: ""
---

> [HTTPRoute](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/httproute/) filters can modify the headers during the request-response lifecycle. [HTTP Header Modifiers](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/http-header-modifier/?h=request#http-header-modifiers) can be used to add, modify or remove headers in incoming requests. We have two types of [filter](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/httproute/#filters-optional) that can be used to instruct the Gateway for desired behaviour.

Reviewer: I don't think we need to mention the two types of filters here since we are only showing how to use the response header filter.

1. [ResponseHeaderModifier](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/http-header-modifier/?h=request#http-response-header-modifier) to alter headers in response before responding to the downstream.

In this guide we will modify the headers for HTTP responses when client requests are made. For an introduction to exposing your application, we recommend that you follow the [basic guide]({{< relref "/how-to/traffic-management/routing-traffic-to-your-app.md" >}}) first.

## Prerequisites

- [Install]({{< relref "/installation/" >}}) NGINX Gateway Fabric.
- [Expose NGINX Gateway Fabric]({{< relref "installation/expose-nginx-gateway-fabric.md" >}}) and save the public IP
  address and port of NGINX Gateway Fabric into shell variables:

   ```text
   GW_IP=XXX.YYY.ZZZ.III
   GW_PORT=<port number>
   ```

{{< note >}}In a production environment, you should have a DNS record for the external IP address that is exposed, and it should refer to the hostname that the gateway will forward for.{{< /note >}}

## Response Header Filter

> In this guide we will deploy NGINX Gateway Fabric and use HTTPRoute resources to route traffic to the server. We will use `ResponseHeaderModifier` filter to modify the HTTP response headers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, we will configure an HTTPRoute with a `ResponseHeaderModifier` filter to modify the HTTP response headers of an application. 
```

### Deploy the Headers application

> Begin by deploying the `headers` applications:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Begin by deploying the example application `headers`:
```

   ```shell
   kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nginxinc/nginx-gateway-fabric/tree/main/examples/http-response-header-filter/headers.yaml

>    ```

Author: what is the best practice around providing links? we use release tags in the previous guides, in that case should this point to `1.3` since its aimed for that

Reviewer 2: I think it should be fine to use 1.3. Before our next release, we'll submit a PR to update all 1.2 strings to 1.3 anyway. The docs in the `main` branch are not published and therefore are subject to be "broken" as they are updated during development.

Verify if the Pod is running in the `default` Namespace:

   ```shell
   kubectl -n default get pods
   ```

   ```text
   NAME                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
   headers-6f854c478-k9z2f   1/1     Running   0          32m
   ```

> ### Deploy the Gateway API Resources for the Coffee Applications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Deploy the Gateway API Resources for the Header Application
```

The [gateway](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/gateway/) resource is typically deployed by the [cluster operator](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/#roles-and-personas_1). To deploy the gateway:

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: gateway
spec:
  gatewayClassName: nginx
  listeners:
  - name: http
    port: 80
    protocol: HTTP
EOF
```

> ### Configure Routing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configure the HTTPRoute
```

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: headers
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: gateway
    sectionName: http
  hostnames:
  - "cafe.example.com"
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /headers
    filters:
    - type: ResponseHeaderModifier
      responseHeaderModifier:
        set:
        - name: Response-Overwrite-Header
          value: overwritten-value
        add:
        - name: My-cool-header
          value: this-is-the-value
        remove:
        - X-Server-Version
    backendRefs:
    - name: headers
      port: 80
EOF
```

This HTTPRoute has a few important properties:

- The `parentRefs` references the gateway resource that we created, and specifically defines the `http` listener to attach to, via the `sectionName` field.
- `cafe.example.com` is the hostname that is matched for all requests to the backends defined in this HTTPRoute.
- The `match` rule defines that all requests with the path prefix `/headers` are sent to the `headers` Service.

> - There is `ResponseHeaderModifier` filter defined for the path prefix `/headers` to overwrite value for header `Response-Overwrite-Header`, append value to header `My-cool-header` and remove `X-Server-Version` header from the HTTP response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- There is a `ResponseHeaderModifier` filter defined for the path prefix `/headers`. This filter sets the value for the header `Response-Overwrite-Header` to `overwritten-value`, adds the value `this-is-the-value` to the header `My-cool-header`, and removes the `X-Server-Version` header.
```

> ### Send Traffic to Headers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Send Traffic to the Headers Application
```

To access the application, we will use `curl` to send requests to the `headers` endpoint.

> Notice our configured header values can be seen in the `responseHeaders` section below, and that the `X-Server-Version` header is absent. The header `My-cool-header` gets appended with the new value and `Response-Overwrite-Header` gets overwritten to `overwritten-value` as defined in the *HttpRoute*.

Reviewer: Before this sentence, let's list the response headers that the headers application normally returns so it's clear what the filter is doing.

Or actually, I think it would be more powerful if we did the following:
- Create an HTTPRoute without the filter
- Send a request with `-i` and show the response header output
- Update the HTTPRoute and add the filter
- Send another request and show how the headers have been modified.

Author: i have updated the tutorial as described above
1. Create a basic HTTPRoute, record results.
2. Create a filter HTTPRoute, record results.

```shell

> curl -v -i --resolve cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT:$GW_IP http://cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT/headers

Reviewer: I don't think you need to `-v`

## Prerequisites

- [Install]({{< relref "/installation/" >}}) NGINX Gateway Fabric.
- [Expose NGINX Gateway Fabric]({{< relref "installation/expose-nginx-gateway-fabric.md" >}}) and save the public IP
  address and port of NGINX Gateway Fabric into shell variables:

   ```text
   GW_IP=XXX.YYY.ZZZ.III
   GW_PORT=<port number>
   ```

{{< note >}}In a production environment, you should have a DNS record for the external IP address that is exposed, and it should refer to the hostname that the gateway will forward for.{{< /note >}}

## Response Header Filter

### Deploy the Headers application

Begin by deploying the example application `headers`:

   ```shell
   kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nginxinc/nginx-gateway-fabric/v1.3.0/examples/http-response-header-filter/headers.yaml
   ```

Verify if the Pod is running in the `default` Namespace:

   ```shell
   kubectl -n default get pods
   ```

   ```text
   NAME                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
   headers-6f854c478-k9z2f   1/1     Running   0          32m
   ```

### Deploy the Gateway API Resources for the Header Application

> The [gateway](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/gateway/) resource is typically deployed by the [cluster operator](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/#roles-and-personas_1). To deploy the gateway:

Author: wouldn't that be duplicate information? I was looking at other guides and they always mention only about `creating the gateway` so trying to understand what is different in this tutorial?

> The [gateway](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/gateway/) resource is typically deployed by the [cluster operator](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/#roles-and-personas_1). To deploy the gateway:

Author: oh maybe you wanted this description. I have added it in the correct place, apologies for the oversight

```
This gateway defines a single listener on port 80. Since no hostname is specified, this listener matches on all hostnames.

```

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: headers
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: gateway
    sectionName: http
  hostnames:
  - "cafe.example.com"
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /headers
    backendRefs:
    - name: headers
      port: 80
EOF
```

### Send Traffic to the Basic Headers Application

To access the application, we will use `curl` to send requests to the `headers` endpoint. Notice our configured header values can be seen in the `responseHeaders` section below. We have four custom response headers defined - `X-Header-Unmodified`, `X-Header-Add`, `X-Header-Set`, `X-Header-Remove`.

```shell
curl -i --resolve cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT:$GW_IP http://cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT/headers
```

```text
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Server: nginx/1.25.5
Date: Mon, 06 May 2024 19:08:39 GMT
Content-Type: text/plain
Content-Length: 2
Connection: keep-alive
X-Header-Unmodified: unmodified
X-Header-Add: add-to
X-Header-Set: overwrite
X-Header-Remove: remove

ok
```

> ### Configure the HTTPRoute with Response Header Modifiers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Update the HTTPRoute to Modify the Response Headers
```

> Let's configure the HTTPRoute with `ResponseHeaderModifier` filter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's update the HTTPRoute by adding a `ResponseHeaderModifier` filter:
```

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: headers
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: gateway
    sectionName: http
  hostnames:
  - "cafe.example.com"
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /headers
    filters:
    - type: ResponseHeaderModifier
      responseHeaderModifier:
        set:
        - name: X-Header-Set
          value: overwritten-value
        add:
        - name: X-Header-Add
          value: this-is-the-appended-value
        remove:
        - X-Header-Remove
    backendRefs:
    - name: headers
      port: 80
EOF
```

This HTTPRoute has a few important properties:

> - The `parentRefs` references the gateway resource that we created, and specifically defines the `http` listener to attach to, via the `sectionName` field.

Reviewer: In this section, we want to highlight the response header filter. The other properties of the HTTPRoute can be moved under the original HTTPRoute.  Then, here we will just emphasize that we've added the ResponseHeaderModifier filter and describe what it does.

- `cafe.example.com` is the hostname that is matched for all requests to the backends defined in this HTTPRoute.
- The `match` rule defines that all requests with the path prefix `/headers` are sent to the `headers` Service.
- There is a `ResponseHeaderModifier` filter defined for the path prefix `/headers`. This filter sets the value for the header `X-Header-Set` to `overwritten-value`, adds the value `this-is-the-appended-value` to the header `X-Header-Add`, and removes `X-Header-Remove` header.

### Send Traffic to the Modified Headers Application

> Notice our configured header values can be seen in the `responseHeaders` section below, and that the `X-Header-Remove` header is absent. The header `X-Header-Add` gets appended with the new value and `X-Header-Set` gets overwritten to `overwritten-value` as defined in the *HttpRoute*.

Reviewer: Let's move this below the output from the curl command. Let's also add a sentence describing what we are doing. Basically, we want to send another curl request to the`/headers` and verify that the response headers are modified.

---
title: "HTTP Response Headers"
description: "Learn how to modify the response headers of your application using NGINX Gateway Fabric."
weight: 700
toc: true

> docs: ""

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: remove the line completely if you don't have a docs UUID

---
title: "HTTP Response Headers"
description: "Learn how to modify the response headers of your application using NGINX Gateway Fabric."
weight: 700
toc: true
docs: ""
---

[HTTPRoute](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/httproute/) filters can modify the headers during the request-response lifecycle. [HTTP Header Modifiers](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/http-header-modifier/?h=request#http-header-modifiers) can be used to add, modify or remove headers in incoming requests.

> 1. [ResponseHeaderModifier](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/http-header-modifier/?h=request#http-response-header-modifier) to alter headers in response before responding to the downstream.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The [ResponseHeaderModifier](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/http-header-modifier/#http-response-header-modifier) is used to alter headers in a response to the client.
```

In this guide we will modify the headers for HTTP responses when client requests are made. For an introduction to exposing your application, we recommend that you follow the [basic guide]({{< relref "/how-to/traffic-management/routing-traffic-to-your-app.md" >}}) first.

## Prerequisites

- [Install]({{< relref "/installation/" >}}) NGINX Gateway Fabric.
- [Expose NGINX Gateway Fabric]({{< relref "installation/expose-nginx-gateway-fabric.md" >}}) and save the public IP
  address and port of NGINX Gateway Fabric into shell variables:

   ```text
   GW_IP=XXX.YYY.ZZZ.III
   GW_PORT=<port number>
   ```

{{< note >}}In a production environment, you should have a DNS record for the external IP address that is exposed, and it should refer to the hostname that the gateway will forward for.{{< /note >}}

## Response Header Filter

> In this guide, we will configure an HTTPRoute with a `ResponseHeaderModifier` filter to modify the HTTP response headers of an application.

Reviewer 2: We've already mentioned this a couple times, I don't think we need to again.

### Deploy the Headers application

Begin by deploying the example application `headers`:

   ```shell
   kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nginxinc/nginx-gateway-fabric/v1.3.0/examples/http-response-header-filter/headers.yaml
   ```

Verify if the Pod is running in the `default` Namespace:

   ```shell
   kubectl -n default get pods
   ```

   ```text
   NAME                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
   headers-6f854c478-k9z2f   1/1     Running   0          32m
   ```

### Deploy the Gateway API Resources for the Header Application

> The [gateway](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/gateway/) resource is typically deployed by the [cluster operator](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/#roles-and-personas_1). To deploy the gateway:

Reviewer 2: @ADubhlaoich do we just need to take initiative and go through and capitalize all resource names (like Gateway) as we had talked about months ago? I wasn't sure if the docs team had an action item or not.

Reviewer: The capitalization of the resource names is inconsistent in this doc. Can we choose one style and stick with it?

Reviewer 4: Didn't noticed I'd been tagged in a thread. Consistency's the most important: capitalise any resource names that haven't been. We have better defined rules about this now but I will fix any issues myself at a later point.

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: gateway
spec:
  gatewayClassName: nginx
  listeners:
  - name: http
    port: 80
    protocol: HTTP
EOF
```

### Configure the basic HTTPRoute

This gateway defines a single listener on port 80. Since no hostname is specified, this listener matches on all hostnames.

> The [HTTPRoute](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/httproute/) is typically deployed by the [application developer](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/#roles-and-personas_1). To deploy the `headers` HTTPRoute:

Reviewer 2: We've linked to HTTPRoute before, I don't think we need to do it multiple times.

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: headers
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: gateway
    sectionName: http
  hostnames:
  - "cafe.example.com"
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /headers
    backendRefs:
    - name: headers
      port: 80
EOF
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Lot of extra newlines here

### Send Traffic to the Basic Headers Application

To access the application, we will use `curl` to send requests to the `headers` endpoint. Notice our configured header values can be seen in the `responseHeaders` section below. We have four custom response headers defined.

```shell
curl -i --resolve cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT:$GW_IP http://cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT/headers
```

```text
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Server: nginx/1.25.5
Date: Mon, 06 May 2024 19:08:39 GMT
Content-Type: text/plain
Content-Length: 2
Connection: keep-alive
X-Header-Unmodified: unmodified
X-Header-Add: add-to
X-Header-Set: overwrite
X-Header-Remove: remove

ok
```

### Configure the HTTPRoute with Response Header Modifiers

This gateway defines a single listener on port 80. Since no hostname is specified, this listener matches on all hostnames.

> The [HTTPRoute](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/httproute/) is typically deployed by the [application developer](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/#roles-and-personas_1). To deploy the `headers` HTTPRoute with `filters` to modify response headers:

Reviewer 2: This first sentence isn't needed again, we've already stated it earlier.

- Sets the value for the header `X-Header-Set` to `overwritten-value`.
- Adds the value `this-is-the-appended-value` to the header `X-Header-Add`.
- Removes `X-Header-Remove` header.

### Send Traffic to the Modified Headers Application

We will send a curl request to the modified `headers` application and verify the response headers are modified.

```shell
curl -i --resolve cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT:$GW_IP http://cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT/headers
```

```text
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Server: nginx/1.25.5
Date: Mon, 06 May 2024 17:58:33 GMT
Content-Type: text/plain
Content-Length: 2
Connection: keep-alive
X-Header-Unmodified: unmodified
X-Header-Add: add-to
X-Header-Add: this-is-the-appended-value
X-Header-Set: overwritten-value

ok
```

In the output above, you can see that the headers application modifies the following custom headers:

In the output above you can notice the modified response headers as the `X-Header-Remove` header is absent. The header `X-Header-Add` gets appended with the new value and `X-Header-Set` gets overwritten to `overwritten-value` as defined in the *HttpRoute*.

> 

Reviewer: Let's add one extra line here pointing out that the `X-Header-Unmodified` headers is unchanged because we did not include it in the filter.

---

[HTTP Header Modifiers](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/http-header-modifier/?h=request#http-header-modifiers) can be used to add, modify or remove headers during the request-response lifecycle. The [ResponseHeaderModifier](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/http-header-modifier/#http-response-header-modifier) is used to alter headers in a response to the client.

In this guide we will modify the headers for HTTP responses when client requests are made. For an introduction to exposing your application, we recommend that you follow the [basic guide]({{< relref "/how-to/traffic-management/routing-traffic-to-your-app.md" >}}) first.

## Prerequisites

- [Install]({{< relref "/installation/" >}}) NGINX Gateway Fabric.
- [Expose NGINX Gateway Fabric]({{< relref "installation/expose-nginx-gateway-fabric.md" >}}) and save the public IP
  address and port of NGINX Gateway Fabric into shell variables:

   ```text
   GW_IP=XXX.YYY.ZZZ.III
   GW_PORT=<port number>
   ```

{{< note >}}In a production environment, you should have a DNS record for the external IP address that is exposed, and it should refer to the hostname that the gateway will forward for.{{< /note >}}

> ## Response Header Filter

Reviewer 2: This header doesn't make sense here.

Author: It basically is a divider between starting the guide.

> In this guide, we'll begin by configuring an app with custom headers and a straightforward HTTPRoute. We'll then observe the server response in relation to header responses. Next, we'll delve into modifying some of those headers using an HTTPRoute with filters to modify *response* headers. Our aim will be to verify whether the server responds with the modified headers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We'll begin by configuring an app with custom headers and a straightforward HTTPRoute. We'll then observe the server response in relation to header responses. Next, we'll delve into modifying some of those headers using an HTTPRoute with filters to modify *response* headers. Our aim will be to verify whether the server responds with the modified headers.
```

## Prerequisites

- [Install]({{< relref "/installation/" >}}) NGINX Gateway Fabric.
- [Expose NGINX Gateway Fabric]({{< relref "installation/expose-nginx-gateway-fabric.md" >}}) and save the public IP
  address and port of NGINX Gateway Fabric into shell variables:

   ```text
   GW_IP=XXX.YYY.ZZZ.III
   GW_PORT=<port number>
   ```

{{< note >}}In a production environment, you should have a DNS record for the external IP address that is exposed, and it should refer to the hostname that the gateway will forward for.{{< /note >}}

## Response Header Filter

In this guide, we'll begin by configuring an app with custom headers and a straightforward httproute. We'll then observe the server response in relation to header responses. Next, we'll delve into modifying some of those headers using an httpRoute with filters to modify *response* headers. Our aim will be to verify whether the server responds with the modified headers.

### Deploy the Headers application

Begin by deploying the example application `headers`. It is a simple application that adds response headers which we'll later tweak and customize.

> ```yaml

Reviewer: This yaml snippet isn't needed since it's contained in the headers.yaml below.

Author: You mentioned in one of the last [reviews](https://github.com/nginxinc/nginx-gateway-fabric/pull/1880#discussion_r1592945865) that i should include the service here for headers. Maybe I misunderstood the expectation?

Reviewer: Sorry, I wasn't very clear before. I was asking you to mention that the yaml _creates_ a service. This is covered by my other suggestion here: https://github.com/nginxinc/nginx-gateway-fabric/pull/1880#discussion_r1594453927.

Author: Yes, I added this. Thank you for being thorough just wanted to make sure i wasn't missing anything

apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: headers
spec:
  ports:
  - port: 80
    targetPort: 8080
    protocol: TCP
    name: http
  selector:
    app: headers
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nginxinc/nginx-gateway-fabric/v1.3.0/examples/http-response-header-filter/headers.yaml
```

> Verify if the Pod is running in the `default` Namespace:

Reviewer: Let's change this to something like: 

This will create the headers service and a deployment with one pod. Run the following command to verify the resources were created:

`kubectl get pods,svc`

```shell
kubectl -n default get pods
```

```text
NAME                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
headers-6f854c478-k9z2f   1/1     Running   0          32m
```

### Deploy the Gateway API Resources for the Header Application

The [gateway](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/gateway/) resource is typically deployed by the [cluster operator](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/#roles-and-personas_1). This gateway defines a single listener on port 80. Since no hostname is specified, this listener matches on all hostnames. To deploy the gateway:

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: gateway
spec:
  gatewayClassName: nginx
  listeners:
  - name: http
    port: 80
    protocol: HTTP
EOF
```

### Configure the basic HTTPRoute

> Next, let's create a simple HTTPRoute that exposes the header application outside the cluster using the listener created in the previous section.To do this, create the following HTTPRoute:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, let's create a simple HTTPRoute that exposes the header application outside the cluster using the listener created in the previous section. To do this, create the following HTTPRoute:
```

kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nginxinc/nginx-gateway-fabric/v1.3.0/examples/http-response-header-filter/headers.yaml
```

> This will create the headers Service and a Deployment with one pod. Run the following command to verify the resources were created:

Reviewer 2: Pod also needs to be capitalized.
